Document `VECTOR` type and new vector functions (#1299)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/functions/vector.adoc

:description: Vector functions allow you to compute the similarity scores of vector pairs.
:table-caption!:
:link-vector-indexes: xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc
= Vector functions

Vector functions allow you to construct xref:values-and-types/vector.adoc[`VECTOR` values], compute the similarity and distance scores of vector pairs, and calculate the size of a vector.

[role=label--new-2025.xx]
[[functions-vector]]
== vector()

.Details
|===

> | *Syntax* 3+| `vector(vectorValue[, dimension, coordinateType])`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Syntax* 3+| `vector(vectorValue, dimension, coordinateType)`
```

| *Description* 3+| Constructs a `VECTOR` value with a dimension and coordinate type.
.4+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `vectorValue` | `STRING` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | The numeric values to create the vector coordinate from.
 or `FLOAT` values, or a `STRING` defining the coordinates in the resulting `VECTOR`.
| `dimension` | `INTEGER` | The number of dimensions (coordinates) in the vector.
| `coordinateType` | `[INTEGER64, INTEGER32, INTEGER16, INTEGER8, FLOAT64, FLOAT32]` | The type of each coordinate in the vector.
| *Returns* 3+| `VECTOR`
|===

[NOTE]
The `VECTOR` values generated by the `vector()` function can be xref:values-and-types/vector.adoc#store-vector-properties[stored as properties].
As such, the `vector()` function can be used to store the embeddings generated by Neo4j's xref:genai-integrations.adoc[GenAI plugin] as `VECTOR` property values.

> `VECTOR` properties can semantically searched by a xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc[vector index].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`VECTOR` properties can be semantically searched by a xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc[vector index].
```

.Considerations
|===

> | If a `STRING` is used in `vectorValue`, it must start and end with square brackets (`[]`).

Reviewer: So one way I think of it is that if that would parse without the quotes, it will parse with them, we use the parser to again parse the string value, not sure if adding something like that would be clearer or more confusing :P but thought you would like to know :)

The values inside the brackets must be a number represented in either decimal or scientific notation and must be comma separated.

> | `null`, NaN, and infinity values are not allowed in `vectorValue`.

Reviewer: Should NaN and Infitinty be backticked too? they are also values/keywords

Reviewer: Ahh also this may be confusing, the vectorValue can be null, just the list cannot contain null, maybe that could be clearer

| If `vectorValue` contain elements that are not of the specified `coordinateType`, they will be coerced to that coordinate type if possible.
This includes the potential of lossy conversion in cases where a larger type, e.g. `INTEGER64` does not fit into the specified type, e.g. `FLOAT32`.

> | If `dimension` is omitted, it is calculated by taking the size of the `vectorValue`.

Reviewer: Dimension cannot be omitted for the first release (this will be added in the future)

For example a `vectorValue` with 1024 elements generates a `VECTOR` value with the dimension `1024`.
| `dimension` must be greater than `0` and less than or equal to `4096`.

> | If `coordinateType` is omitted, the type will be determined by Cypher.

Reviewer: CoordinateType cannot be omitted for the first release

If the `LIST` used as `vectorValue` is mixed containing exclusively `INTEGER` values, then the largest of those types will be set as the `coordinateType`.
For example, `LIST<INTEGER64 \| INTEGER32`> generates a `VECTOR` value with a `coordinateType` of `INTEGER64`.
If the `vectorValue` contains both `FLOAT` and `INTEGER` values, then the `coordinateType` will be that of the largest `FLOAT` present in `vectorValue`.
For example, `LIST<INTEGER64 \| FLOAT64`> generates a `VECTOR` value with a `coordinateType` of `FLOAT64`.

> | A `null` `vectorValue`, `dimension`, or `coordinateType` will return `null`.

Reviewer: Technically as coordinate type is a keyword, it can't be null

|===

.vector()
=====

.Construct a `VECTOR` value
[source, cypher]
----
WITH vector([1, 2, 3], 3, INTEGER) AS vector
RETURN vector, valueType(vector) AS vectorType
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| vector | vectorType

> | [1, 2, 3] | "VECTOR<INTEGER64 NOT NULL>(3) NOT NULL"

Reviewer: Did you try this? I think it should be `"VECTOR<INTEGER NOT NULL>(3) NOT NULL"` still

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

.Construct a `VECTOR` value with a `STRING` `vectorValue`
[source, cypher]
----
WITH vector("[1.05000e+00, 0.123, 5]", 3, FLOAT32) as vector
RETURN vector, valueType(vector) AS vectorType
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| vector | vectorType

| | "VECTOR<FLOAT32 NOT NULL>(3) NOT NULL"

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

.Construct a `VECTOR` value omitting both `dimension` and `coordinateType`
[source, cypher]
----
WITH vector([1, 2.5, 3]) AS vector
RETURN vector, valueType(vector) AS vectorType
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| vector | vectorType

| [1, 2, 3] | "VECTOR<FLOAT64 NOT NULL>(3) NOT NULL"

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

.`null` values
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN vector(null, 3, FLOAT32) AS nullVectorValue,
       vector([1, 2, 3], null, INTEGER8) AS nullDimension,

>        vector([1, 2, 3], 3, null) AS nullCoordinateType

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETURN vector(null, 3, FLOAT32) AS nullVectorValue,
       vector([1, 2, 3], null, INTEGER8) AS nullDimension
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| nullVectorValue | nullDimension | nullCoordinateType

> | null | null | null

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| nullVectorValue | nullDimension

| null | null
```

| *Syntax* 3+| `vector(vectorValue, dimension, coordinateType)`
| *Description* 3+| Constructs a `VECTOR` value.
.4+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `vectorValue` | `STRING` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | The numeric values to create the vector coordinates from.
| `dimension` | `INTEGER` | The dimension (number of coordinates) of the vector.
| `coordinateType` | `[INTEGER64, INTEGER32, INTEGER16, INTEGER8, FLOAT64, FLOAT32]` | The type of each coordinate in the vector.
| *Returns* 3+| `VECTOR`
|===

[NOTE]
The `VECTOR` values generated by the `vector()` function can be xref:values-and-types/vector.adoc#store-vector-properties[stored as properties].
As such, the `vector()` function can be used to store the embeddings generated by Neo4j's xref:genai-integrations.adoc[GenAI plugin] as `VECTOR` property values.
`VECTOR` properties can be semantically searched by a xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc[vector index].

.Considerations
|===

| If a `STRING` is used in `vectorValue`, it must start and end with square brackets (`[]`).
The values inside the brackets must be a number represented in either decimal or scientific notation and must be comma separated.

> | `null`, `NaN`, and `Infinity` values are not allowed as elements in the `LIST` used as `vectorValue`.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
| `null`, `NaN`, and `Infinity` values are not allowed as coordinate values.
```

| *Syntax* 3+| `vector.similarity.cosine(a, b)`
| *Description* 3+| Returns a `FLOAT` representing the similarity between the argument vectors based on their cosine.
.3+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*

> | `a` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A list representing the first vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `a` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A vector or list value representing the first vector.
```

> | `b` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A list representing the second vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `b` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A vector or  list value representing the second vector.
```

| *Syntax* 3+| `vector.similarity.euclidean(a, b)`
| *Description* 3+| Returns a `FLOAT` representing the similarity between the argument vectors based on their Euclidean distance.
.3+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `a` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A list representing the first vector.

> | `b` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A list representing the second vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `a` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A vector or list value representing the first vector.
| `b` | `VECTOR` \| `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` | A vector or list value representing the second vector.
```

======

[role=label--new-2025.xx]
[[functions-vector_dimension_count]]
== vector_dimension_count()

.Details
|===
| *Syntax* 3+| `vector_dimension_count(vector)`
| *Description* 3+| Returns the dimension of a `VECTOR`.
.2+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `vector` | `VECTOR` | The vector to calculate the dimension of.
| *Returns* 3+| `INTEGER`
|===

.Considerations
|===

| If `vector` is not a xref:values-and-types/vector.adoc[`VECTOR`] value, an error will be thrown.
| The xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-size[`size()`] function can also be used to return the dimension of a `VECTOR` value.

|===

.vector_dimension_count()
=====

.Calculate the size of a `VECTOR`
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN vector_dimension_count(vector([1, 2, 3], 3, INTEGER)) AS size
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| size
| 3

1+d|Rows: 1

|===
=====

[role=label--new-2025.xx]
[[functions-vector_distance]]
== vector_distance()

.Details
|===

> | *Syntax* 3+| `vector_dimension(vector1, vector2, vectorDistanceMetric)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Syntax* 3+| `vector_distance(vector1, vector2, vectorDistanceMetric)`
```

======

[role=label--new-2025.xx]
[[functions-vector_dimension_count]]
== vector_dimension_count()

.Details
|===
| *Syntax* 3+| `vector_dimension_count(vector)`
| *Description* 3+| Calculates the dimension of a `VECTOR`.
.2+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `vector` | `VECTOR` | The vector to calculate the dimension of.
| *Returns* 3+| `INTEGER`
|===

.Considerations
|===

| If `vector` is not a xref:values-and-types/vector.adoc[`VECTOR`] value, an error will be thrown.

> | Alias to the xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-size[`size()`] function.

Reviewer: It is only an alias in the sense the size function will give the same answer for a vector value, but this function will not work with non vectors, so not a true alias I guess

|===

.Considerations
|===

| The smaller the returned number, the more similar the `VECTOR` values.
The larger the number, the more distant the vectors.
This is in contrast to the similarity functions where the closer to `1` the result is the higher the degree of similarity.

|===

.vector_distance()
=====

.Calculate the distance between two `VECTOR` values using the `COSINE` vector distance algorithm
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN vector_distance(vector([1, 2, 3], 3, INT), vector([1, 2, 4], 3, INT), COSINE) AS distance
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| distance
| 0.008539795875549316

1+d|Rows: 1

|===

.Calculate the distance between two `VECTOR` values using the `EUCLIDEAN` distance algorithm
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN vector_distance(vector([1.0, 5.0, 3.0, 6.7], 4, FLOAT), vector([5.0, 2.5, 3.1, 9.0], 4, FLOAT), EUCLIDEAN)
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| distance
| 5.248809388804284

1+d|Rows: 1

|===

=====

[role=label--new-2025.xx]
[[functions-vector_norm]]
== vector_norm()

.Details
|===
| *Syntax* 3+| `vector_norm(vector, vectorDistanceMetric)`

> | *Description* 3+|  Returns a `FLOAT` representing the norm (distance) between the given vector and an origin vector of the same dimension with all coordinates set to zero, calculated using the specified `vectorDistanceMetric`.

Reviewer: Maybe check with Matt about this one, norm should be short hand for normalize I guess, which might make more sense when talking about it in a sentence

.4+| *Arguments* | *Name* | *Type* | *Description*
| `vector` | `VECTOR` | A vector for which the norm to the origin vector will be computed.
| `vectorDistanceMetric` | `[EUCLIDEAN, MANHATTAN]` | The vector distance algorithm to calculate the distance by.
| *Returns* 3+| `FLOAT`
|===

.Supported `vectorDistanceMetric` algorithms
[cols="1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Distance Type | Formula

| `EUCLIDEAN`
| √( (A₁ - B₁)² + (A₂ - B₂)² + ... + (Aᴰ - Bᴰ)² )

| `MANHATTAN`
| \|A₁ - B₁\| + \|A₂ - B₂\| + ... + \|Aᴰ - Bᴰ\|

|===

.vector_norm()
=====

.Measure the norm between a vector and an origin vector using the `EUCLIDEAN` distance algorithm
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN vector_norm(vector([1.0, 5.0, 3.0, 6.7], 4, FLOAT), EUCLIDEAN) AS norm
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| norm
| 8.93812060782355

1+d|Rows: 1

|===

.Measure the norm between a vector and an origin vector using the `EUCLIDEAN` distance algorithm
[source, cypher]
----

> RETURN vector_norm(Vector([1.0, 5.0, 3.0, 6.7], 4, FLOAT), 'MANHATTAN') AS norm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETURN vector_norm(vector([1.0, 5.0, 3.0, 6.7], 4, FLOAT), MANHATTAN) AS norm
```
